Which robo advisor models might succeed in Asia?

Some global asset managers have purchased robo advisors in their home markets while others are constructing their own customised advisory platforms in-house. In Asia’s bank-dominated distribution landscape, fund houses may face different challenges in bringing either model to market.

In the U.S., BlackRock acquired California-based robo advisor FutureAdvisor in August last year, while Invesco last month bought digital advisory start-up Jemstep in moves that will drive two of the world’s largest exchange-traded fund (ETF) providers to play a more direct role in the distribution of their own funds.

Boston-based Fidelity Investments, on the other hand, has chosen to construct its own in-house robo advisor, dubbed Fidelity Go, offering both its own affiliated mutual funds as well as iShares ETFs from rival BlackRock. It is expected to come to market this year.

For all three managers, the U.S. has a large network of broker-dealers and financial advisors with which fund houses can partner to offer advisory platform services to a large market of relatively well informed investors, but Asia’s distribution may pose different challenges.

Global asset management companies have yet to embark on bringing these new platforms to Asia or acquiring the few regional equivalents that have emerged, but as large banks and financial conglomerates dominate much of the distribution landscape in many local Asian markets, both local and global fund houses may have to think differently about their approach to developing or bringing robo advisors on these platforms to Asia.

BlackRock has emphasised its support of Asia’s burgeoning robo-advisor industry. Kevin Hardy, Singapore-based head of beta strategies in Asia Pacific and country head of BlackRock Singapore, told Ignites Asia this week that the company hopes to play a role in the growth of the region’s robo-advisory space but stopped short of revealing any details on whether it would acquire or build a robo advisor specifically for Asian clients.

Teaming up in Japan

In Japan, three conglomerates, all with large asset management arms – Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group and Mizuho Financial Group – play a dominant role in the domestic fund industry, which to some extent lacks some of the large, independent fund houses found in other markets.

Mizuho’s banking arm has led the way in digital investment services, launching in November Smart Folio, through which clients can create a portfolio of investments that takes into account their personal profile, including age, financial circumstances and needs.

The Smart Folio platform offers around six or seven types of products, most of which are Mizuho Asset Management related products. But it also includes some global funds managed by companies such as BlackRock, which means that the website can state that it is “neutral” – that it’s an “advisor” and not just a distributor of its own funds, says Eiichiro Yanagawa, Tokyo-based senior analyst with Celent’s Asian Financial Services.
Japanese-style business is very conglomerate-based; there are “no strong independent asset management companies”, and almost all asset managers are aggregated into large financial groups, such as Sumitomo, Mitsubishi and Mizuho, which will work to develop synergies between their different arms when it comes to financial technology rather than looking for solutions or acquisitions outside the business, says Yanagawa.

“Within the same conglomerate, definitely they live in the same building and should dream the same dream from the same bed,” he adds.

Vanguard, the world’s second-largest fund manager by assets, rolled out in the U.S. last year its own robo-advisor platform consisting primarily of its own funds. The company made a move into the Japanese market at the end of 2015, teaming up with two local financial companies, Credit Saison and Monex Group, in order to create and monitor investment portfolios for clients via online platforms.

Yanagawa believes one of the reasons that Vanguard has cooperated with independent securities firms on this yet-to-be-named joint venture is to take advantage of Monex Group’s online securities business, Monex Securities, to launch a similar robo-advisory platform in Japan.

Advice for building in-house robo advisors

With the potential growth of robo-advisory services, EY has built a prototype robo advisor so that it can offer its consulting services to asset management companies and fund distributors looking to build their own in-house platform.

“We have had plenty of discussions with all participants in the industry and regulators on these topics, and I can ensure that everybody is very keen to make it happen,” says Jeroen Buwalda, Hong Kong-based Asia-Pacific wealth and asset management leader at EY.

“There are a lot of passive fund managers with exchange-traded products that would love robo advisors to be more successful. They are going to build them. They are going to promote them,” he adds.

Japan’s large financial firms have already taken their first steps in developing robo-advisor platforms; others are little further behind. Companies in Australia have matured to committing significant capital, while in Hong Kong there is a lot of talking and some good initial traction, but it is still early days, according to Buwalda.

So far in Hong Kong, securities firms rather than banks have been the first to launch robo-advisor platforms. In January, Hong Kong-based brokerage 8 Securities launched its version of a robo advisor called 8Now!, targeting retail investors with a minimum US$10,000 initial investment.

Buwalda also believes China-based asset management companies may be keen to develop their own robo-advisory services with banking or third-party partners, following the success of other types of online fund distribution platforms, such the Alipay Yu’E Bao platform, and that they could take off very quickly.

There are likely to be different types and business models of robo advisor popping up across Asia. But with securities firms, independent asset management companies and bank-affiliated fund houses all looking to get into the robo-advisor business, it begs the question: which one may be able to develop the most feasible business model?

In Asia, some of the largest asset management companies have been established as an arm of a large bank or financial conglomerate. According to statistics from Boston-based research firm Cerulli Associates, fund distribution by traditional retail banks accounted for close to 60% of all sales in Asia in 2013.

With the lion’s share of captive retail investors, it would seem Asian banks have the client base, the resources and potentially a scalable model to achieve the greatest success with robo-advisory services. But until banks lose significant business from investors choosing alternative robo-advisor platforms over traditional advice, there may not be sufficient incentive for them to establish online investment channels that undercut other profitable areas of their business.

Many investors across different markets in Asia are accustomed to receiving face-to-face advice from investment advisors at banks. Banks profit from this by charging much higher fees than they could potentially earn through an automated online advisory platform.

Even if independent asset managers have the resources to develop an in-house robo advisor, they may face conflicts. In many markets, these fund houses depend on vital distribution contracts from a small number of large banks and may be reluctant to jeopardise this revenue stream by a establishing a direct competition to their most important clients by launching their own online advisory and sales platforms.

EY’s Buwalda is confident that eventually banks in Asia will follow the lead of Japan’s Mizuho and are likely to cooperate with affiliated asset management arms to come up with a beneficial model that wraps around their own products rather than being completely open architecture.

“Any big bank in Hong Kong, or in Asia, or in fact anywhere else in the world, that introduces robo advice to their clients… it could bring so many benefits that it’s a really compelling case,” he says.
